README.md, before:

# Project Summary

## What is the Game of Life?
From the Wikipedia entry for [Conway's Game of Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life#Rules):

>The universe of the Game of Life is an infinite two-dimensional orthogonal grid of square cells, each of which is in one of two possible states, alive or dead, or "populated" or "unpopulated". Every cell interacts with its eight neighbours, which are the cells that are horizontally, vertically, or diagonally adjacent. At each step in time, the following transitions occur:

>- Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if caused by underpopulation.
>- Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next generation.
>- Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by overpopulation.
>- Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by reproduction.


>The initial pattern constitutes the seed of the system. The first generation is created by applying the above rules simultaneously to every cell in the seed—births and deaths occur simultaneously, and the discrete moment at which this happens is sometimes called a tick (in other words, each generation is a pure function of the preceding one). The rules continue to be applied repeatedly to create further generations.

Try out this [Interactive Game of Life](https://bitstorm.org/gameoflife/) to get a better idea of what you're about to build.

We're going to build one that starts out with just the basic functionality:

![gif of the game of life](https://media.giphy.com/media/QfsvYoBSSpfbtFJIVo/giphy.gif)

### Project Requirements
What will our Game of Life (GOL) program need to be able to do?

We'll implement the following requirements in steps so that the program always runs and we can see the improvements over time:

- draw a two-dimensional orthogonal grid of square cells
- keep track of each cell in the grid
- a cell can be in one of 2 states: dead or alive
- create an initial population to seed the grid with dead and alive cells
- get the 8 neighbors for any cell and count how many neighbors are alive
- change a cell to being alive or dead based on the rules
- transition all cells from one generation to the next at the same time
- extend functionality with mouse and key commands and/or text displays of population and generation

## Preparing Your Project

### Step 1 - Forking the Project on GitHub

If you don't already have a [GitHub](https://github.com) account, sign up for one now!

Fork the project skeleton [project link] to your GitHub account.

![screenshot of forking the project](TODO)

### Step 2 - Enabling GitHub Pages
Turn on GitHub pages for your `p5js-game-of-life` repo. [TODO detailed instructions]

![screenshot of initial github pages view](TODO)

 You can also share this link to friends and family so they can see your progress and eventually your finished project!

### Step 3 - Editing and Viewing Changes Locally
Download the project to work on it locally. You may use any editor you want (Atom, Sublime, etc).

To run your p5.js script locally, open your browser (Chrome, Safari, etc) and navigate to the path for `index.html`. The exact path will depend on where you saved the project when you downloaded it, but it will look something like this: `/Users/username/Files/Coding/p5js-game-of-life/index.html`

In Sublime you can right click in the file and copy the file path.

![screenshot of copying file path in sublime](images/sublime-copy-file-path-pretty.png)

Paste the path into your browser and you should see the simple page with the canvas below.

![screenshot of initial project web view](TODO)

As you edit and save the contents of `sketches/gol.js`, simply refresh the browser page to reload and see the changes.

### Step 4 - Saving Your Changes on GitHub
At the end of each step of this project, you will need to create a new commit and save it to your GitHub repo.

This is important for keeping a history of your changes for yourself and so that others can see your progress over time. This is similar to showing your work on a long math problem. We don't want to just see the final answer, we want to see the incremental work that went into creating the final product. It's also very helpful in case your code ever gets so broken that you want to go back a step and start over.

#### Use git in the terminal...
If you are not already familiar with using git and/or GitHub, you can check out the Product College prework [introduction to GitHub tutorials](https://github.com/MakeSchool/Product-College-Prework#git-and-github) and learn how to make git commits and push them to GitHub via the terminal...

#### OR save your changes to GitHub directly in the browser

1- Navigate to the file you want to save changes to
![screenshot of saving directly on github](images/github-select-file-to-edit-pretty.png)

2- Click on the `edit` pencil button on the top right of the page
![screenshot of saving directly on github](images/github-edit-file-pretty.png)

3- Copy your working code from your local edits, and paste it into the edit view on GitHub
4- Review the code you pasted, and once it looks good, commit the changes with a good commit message
![screenshot of saving directly on github](images/github-commit-changes-pretty.png)

If you have correctly saved your changes to GitHub, you'll be able to visit/refresh your project's GitHub page and see your updated program live on the internet.

## Creating the Game of Life
### Step 1
Create a `Grid` class with a `draw` function. Give the `Grid` class a constructor parameter `cellSize` so that it can automatically calculate how many columns and rows it should have based on the canvas `width` and `height`

#### Check

When you are done, uncomment/re-enable the other lines in `setup` and `draw` and confirm that you now see a grid of 20x20 cells in your canvas.

![screenshot screenshot of saving directly on github](images/grid-all-dead-pretty.png)

**IMPORTANT**
Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 1, update the grid constructor"

### Step 2
Now we need to add a way to keep track of the contents of each cell in the grid. At the bottom of the constructor, we need to create and assign a 2D array to `cells`.
First assign `cells` to a new array with length equal to `numberOfColumns`. Then, for each position in the array, assign it to another new array with length equal to `numberOfRows`.

Here's one way to create a 2D array:

```javascript
var x = 2; // how big the first array should be
var y = 2; // how big each array inside of the first array should be
var twoDArray = new Array(x);
for (var i = 0; i < twoDArray.length; i ++) {
  twoDArray[i] = new Array(y);
}
```

#### Check
Add `print(this.cells)` at the end of the constructor. Check that the console prints out `Array(20)` (you should also be able to expand it and see that each position also holds an empty array).

![screenshot](TODO)

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 2, track cells in grid"

### Step 3
Right now our grid has an array of arrays to keep track of cells, but we need some cells to put in it. Let's start by creating a basic `Cell` class. Each cell should have a `column`, `row`, and `size` - ensure the constructor takes these as parameters.

Additionally, each cell can be either alive or dead, so let's add a boolean property to keep track of it called `isAlive`. Inside the constructor, have every cell start off dead (`isAlive` should be `false`).

Once you have the basic `Cell` class added, paste the following code just above `print(this.cells)` from the last step:

```javascript
for (var column = 0; column < this.numberOfColumns; column ++) {
  for (var row = 0; row < this.numberOfRows; row++) {
    this.cells[column][row] = new Cell(column, row, cellSize)
  }
}
```
This code will go into each position in the 2D array and create a new `Cell`.

#### Check
Refresh the page and check that the console now shows a `Cell` and it's values instead of empty arrays.

![screenshot](TODO)

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 3, create Cell class"

### Step 4
Now that our grid can keep track of all of it's cells, let's start adding more functionality to the cell. To start, let's give `Cell` it's own `draw` function, so that it will be responsible for it's own appearance based on whether it is dead or alive.

Inside of `Grid.draw`, remove everything inside of the nested for loop and paste it inside of the new `Cell.draw` function. Be sure to update the variables from the copied code to use `this` and to match the property names within the cell class (`column` -> `this.column`, etc).

Back in the `Grid.draw` for loop, instead, get the cell from `this.cells` and call `draw` on it. When you re-run your program, everything should look exactly the same, but now each cell is drawing itself.

If you get errors, use them to help guide you to where you still need to make changes, as they will often give you a line number and indicate which variable it couldn't find.

Finally, replace `fill(240);` with an `if else` statement to change the `fill` color depending on if the cell is alive or dead. You may choose any colors you like, but this tutorial will use `color(240)` for dead cells, and `color(200,0,200)` for alive cells.

#### Check
Temporarily change `this.isAlive = false;` to `this.isAlive = true;` inside of the cell constructor and confirm that your `if` statement is correctly assigning colors depending on the cell's value.

[screenshot all dead]
[screenshot all alive]

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 4, cell draws itself"

### Step 5
Starting all the cells as all dead or all alive isn't very exciting. First let's add a function to `Cell` that we can call to set the value of `isAlive` directly. Add a new function to `Cell` called 'setIsAlive`, that takes a paramenter `value`. If `value` is true, assign `isAlive` to true, otherwise set it to `false`.

Now we want to add a new function `randomize` to `Grid`. It should loop over all of it's cells just like the `draw` function. But instead of calling `draw` on the cell, we want to call 'setIsAlive` and pass it a value that will evaluate to `true` or `false`.

We can use `random` to help us. Since `0` is treated as `false` and `1` is treated as `true`, we can do `floor(random(2))` and pass the result to 'setIsAlive`. `random(2)` will create random decimals between 0 and 2, and `floor` turns it into an integer by dropping everything after the decimal. You can try `print(random(2));` and `print(floor(random(2)));` to see the results in the console.

Finally, add `grid.randomize();` to the bottom of the 'setup` function.

#### Check
Each time you run the program, you should now be seeing a mix of dead and alive cells.

![screenshot](TODO)

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 5, randomize starting cells"

### Step 6
We are ready to start adding the logic for how the population will change over time, based on the following rules:

- Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if caused by underpopulation.
- Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next generation.
- Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by overpopulation.
- Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by reproduction.

Notice that each line expresses some conditional logic based on two properties: whether the cell is currently dead or alive, and how many of the neighboring cells are alive. We already have the ability to check if a cell is dead or alive, but now we need to add some code that will help us to count a cell's living neighbors.

First, add a new property to `Cell` to store `liveNeighborCount` and initialize it as `0` on creation.

Now let's add a new function called `updateNeighborCounts` to the `Grid` class and call it before `grid.draw`. We want this function to loop over all of the cells, count how many of it's neighbors are alive and then update `liveNeighborCount` for each one. Here's an outline of what the function needs to do:

```javascript
updateNeighborCounts () {
  // for each cell in the grid
  // reset it's neighbor count to 0
  // for each of the cell's neighbors, if it is alive add 1 to neighborCount
}
```

Notice there are two "for each" comments here. That's a clue that this method will include at least 2 nested for loops - once to look at each cell, and another to look at each neighhor of the cell. One of the hardest part of this function will be answering the question: how do we get the cell's neighbors?

Let's look at an example with a much smaller grid. If a cell is at position x, y in the grid, it's neighbor cells will be the 8 surround cells in the grid.

[insert image of 3x3 cell with neighbors]

You can see that the x-values for neighbor cells are either 1 less, the same, or 1 more than the current cell's x position. The same is true for the y-values.

So, given `currentCell`, the way to loop through all 9 x, y positions around and including the cell, the code would look like this:

```javascript
for (var xOffset = -1; xOffset <= 1; xOffset++) {
  for (var yOffset = -1; yOffset <= 1; yOffset++) {
    var neighborX = currentCell.column + xOffset
    var neighborY = currentCell.row + yOffset

    // do something with neighborX and neighborY
  }
}
```

You can use the above code to help get you started, but you'll still have to add in more code to handle a few different edge cases:

- this code will loop over 9 cells, including the current one, so be sure not to count the current cell as one of it's neighbors
- to avoid errors, your code shouldn't try to access grid locations that don't exist

[picture of cell on edge of the grid]

#### Check
add `print(currentCell.liveNeighborCount)` at the end of looping through it's neighbors and check in the console that the numbers look right. they should all be between 0 and 8.

[screenshot of different values in console]

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 6, update neighbor counts"

### Step 7
We're finally ready to apply the logic to each cell to determine whether it should be dead or alive in the next generation.

We want the `Grid` class to loop over each cell again (you should be very comfortable with these nested loops by now) and tell the cell to determine if it will be dead or alive. But we want the `Cell` class to be responsible for knowing the exact logic and handling it's own life or death.

Add an `updatePopulation` function to `Grid` and call it after `updateNeighborCounts` and before `draw`. Inside the method, loop over each cell and call `liveOrDie` on it.

Now make `liveOrDie` as a function in the `Cell` class. Here is where you now need to add some conditional logic for the cell to look at it's values for `isAlive` and `neighborCount` and determine what to change `isAlive` to.

- Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if caused by underpopulation.
- Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next generation.
- Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by overpopulation.
- Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by reproduction.

#### Check
Your game should be fully functional now! Try decreasing the cell size when you create the grid to see a larger population of cells on the screen at once to confirm that the population changes as expected.

[gif of working game]

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 7, population updates"

### Step 8+
Try extending the functionality of the game.

Here are some ideas:

Allow the user to...

- pause the game
- manually turn cells on or off
- re-randomize the population without refreshing the page
- adjust how fast the population changes (slower so you can see the changes more easily)
- see the current number of living cells
- see how many generations have occurred
- *or create your own modification!*

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Continue to use good commit messages!

Commit message:

Add steps and images for github setup

README.md, after:

# Project Summary

## What is the Game of Life?
From the Wikipedia entry for [Conway's Game of Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life#Rules):

>The universe of the Game of Life is an infinite two-dimensional orthogonal grid of square cells, each of which is in one of two possible states, alive or dead, or "populated" or "unpopulated". Every cell interacts with its eight neighbours, which are the cells that are horizontally, vertically, or diagonally adjacent. At each step in time, the following transitions occur:

>- Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if caused by underpopulation.
>- Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next generation.
>- Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by overpopulation.
>- Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by reproduction.


>The initial pattern constitutes the seed of the system. The first generation is created by applying the above rules simultaneously to every cell in the seed—births and deaths occur simultaneously, and the discrete moment at which this happens is sometimes called a tick (in other words, each generation is a pure function of the preceding one). The rules continue to be applied repeatedly to create further generations.

Try out this [Interactive Game of Life](https://bitstorm.org/gameoflife/) to get a better idea of what you're about to build.

We're going to build one that starts out with just the basic functionality:

![gif of the game of life](https://media.giphy.com/media/QfsvYoBSSpfbtFJIVo/giphy.gif)

### Project Requirements
What will our Game of Life (GOL) program need to be able to do?

We'll implement the following requirements in steps so that the program always runs and we can see the improvements over time:

- draw a two-dimensional orthogonal grid of square cells
- keep track of each cell in the grid
- a cell can be in one of 2 states: dead or alive
- create an initial population to seed the grid with dead and alive cells
- get the 8 neighbors for any cell and count how many neighbors are alive
- change a cell to being alive or dead based on the rules
- transition all cells from one generation to the next at the same time
- extend functionality with mouse and key commands and/or text displays of population and generation

## Preparing Your Project

### Step 1 - Forking the Project on GitHub

If you don't already have a [GitHub](https://github.com) account, sign up for one now!

Visit the repo for the [project skeleton](TODO), which has the basic files you'll need already set up for you. This will be the starting point from which you'll follow the tutorial steps to slowly build up the rest of the Game of Life functionality.

Fork the project skeleton [project link] to your GitHub account by clicking the "fork" button in the upper right corner of the page. This will create an exact copy of the repo on your own GitHub profile.

![screenshot of github fork button](images/github-fork-button-pretty.png)

### Step 2 - Enabling GitHub Pages

Turning on GitHub pages for your repo will create a live hosted version of your project's `index.html` page, so that you'll have a real web address that others can visit to play your Game of Life.

Once you've forked the skeleton project, visit the new repo that was created on your own account.

Go to "Settings" and then scroll down until you see the "GitHub Pages" options. In the drop down, select `master branch` and then click "Save".

![screenshot of turning on github pages in the settings](images/github-turn-on-pages-pretty.png)

Now you'll be able to visit the live page at the url that it gives you in the settings. It should look like `https://your_user_name.github.io/your_repo_name/`

If you visit the link now, you should see the initial view with the plain gray canvas.

![screenshot of initial github pages view](images/canvas-project-start-pretty.png)

 You can also share this link to friends and family so they can see your progress and eventually your finished project!

### Step 3 - Editing and Viewing Changes Locally
Download the project to work on it locally. You may use any editor you want (Atom, Sublime, etc).

To run your p5.js script locally, open your browser (Chrome, Safari, etc) and navigate to the path for `index.html`. The exact path will depend on where you saved the project when you downloaded it, but it will look something like this: `/Users/username/Files/Coding/p5js-game-of-life/index.html`

In Sublime you can right click in the file and copy the file path.

![screenshot of copying file path in sublime](images/sublime-copy-file-path-pretty.png)

Paste the path into your browser and you should see the simple page with the canvas below. This should look exactly like what you saw when you visited your GitHub pages link.

![screenshot of initial project web view](images/canvas-project-start-pretty.png)

As you edit and save the contents of `sketches/gol.js`, simply refresh the browser page (for the local path) to reload the sketch and see the changes.

### Step 4 - Saving Your Changes on GitHub
At the end of each step of this project, you will need to create a new commit and save it to your GitHub repo.

This is important for keeping a history of your changes for yourself and so that others can see your progress over time. This is similar to showing your work on a long math problem. We don't want to just see the final answer, we want to see the incremental work that went into creating the final product. It's also very helpful in case your code ever gets so broken that you want to go back a step and start over.

#### Use git in the terminal...
If you are not already familiar with using git and/or GitHub, you can check out the Product College prework [introduction to GitHub tutorials](https://github.com/MakeSchool/Product-College-Prework#git-and-github) and learn how to make git commits and push them to GitHub via the terminal...

#### OR save your changes to GitHub directly in the browser

1- Navigate to the file you want to save changes to
![screenshot of saving directly on github](images/github-select-file-to-edit-pretty.png)

2- Click on the `edit` pencil button on the top right of the page
![screenshot of saving directly on github](images/github-edit-file-pretty.png)

3- Copy your working code from your local edits, and paste it into the edit view on GitHub
4- Review the code you pasted, and once it looks good, commit the changes with a good commit message
![screenshot of saving directly on github](images/github-commit-changes-pretty.png)

If you have correctly saved your changes to GitHub, you'll be able to visit/refresh your project's GitHub page and see your updated program live on the internet.

## Creating the Game of Life
### Step 1
Create a `Grid` class with a `draw` function. Give the `Grid` class a constructor parameter `cellSize` so that it can automatically calculate how many columns and rows it should have based on the canvas `width` and `height`

#### Check

When you are done, uncomment/re-enable the other lines in `setup` and `draw` and confirm that you now see a grid of 20x20 cells in your canvas.

![screenshot screenshot of saving directly on github](images/grid-all-dead-pretty.png)

**IMPORTANT**
Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 1, update the grid constructor"

### Step 2
Now we need to add a way to keep track of the contents of each cell in the grid. At the bottom of the constructor, we need to create and assign a 2D array to `cells`.
First assign `cells` to a new array with length equal to `numberOfColumns`. Then, for each position in the array, assign it to another new array with length equal to `numberOfRows`.

Here's one way to create a 2D array:

```javascript
var x = 2; // how big the first array should be
var y = 2; // how big each array inside of the first array should be
var twoDArray = new Array(x);
for (var i = 0; i < twoDArray.length; i ++) {
  twoDArray[i] = new Array(y);
}
```

#### Check
Add `print(this.cells)` at the end of the constructor. Check that the console prints out `Array(20)` (you should also be able to expand it and see that each position also holds an empty array).

![screenshot](TODO)

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 2, track cells in grid"

### Step 3
Right now our grid has an array of arrays to keep track of cells, but we need some cells to put in it. Let's start by creating a basic `Cell` class. Each cell should have a `column`, `row`, and `size` - ensure the constructor takes these as parameters.

Additionally, each cell can be either alive or dead, so let's add a boolean property to keep track of it called `isAlive`. Inside the constructor, have every cell start off dead (`isAlive` should be `false`).

Once you have the basic `Cell` class added, paste the following code just above `print(this.cells)` from the last step:

```javascript
for (var column = 0; column < this.numberOfColumns; column ++) {
  for (var row = 0; row < this.numberOfRows; row++) {
    this.cells[column][row] = new Cell(column, row, cellSize)
  }
}
```
This code will go into each position in the 2D array and create a new `Cell`.

#### Check
Refresh the page and check that the console now shows a `Cell` and it's values instead of empty arrays.

![screenshot](TODO)

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 3, create Cell class"

### Step 4
Now that our grid can keep track of all of it's cells, let's start adding more functionality to the cell. To start, let's give `Cell` it's own `draw` function, so that it will be responsible for it's own appearance based on whether it is dead or alive.

Inside of `Grid.draw`, remove everything inside of the nested for loop and paste it inside of the new `Cell.draw` function. Be sure to update the variables from the copied code to use `this` and to match the property names within the cell class (`column` -> `this.column`, etc).

Back in the `Grid.draw` for loop, instead, get the cell from `this.cells` and call `draw` on it. When you re-run your program, everything should look exactly the same, but now each cell is drawing itself.

If you get errors, use them to help guide you to where you still need to make changes, as they will often give you a line number and indicate which variable it couldn't find.

Finally, replace `fill(240);` with an `if else` statement to change the `fill` color depending on if the cell is alive or dead. You may choose any colors you like, but this tutorial will use `color(240)` for dead cells, and `color(200,0,200)` for alive cells.

#### Check
Temporarily change `this.isAlive = false;` to `this.isAlive = true;` inside of the cell constructor and confirm that your `if` statement is correctly assigning colors depending on the cell's value.

[screenshot all dead]
[screenshot all alive]

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 4, cell draws itself"

### Step 5
Starting all the cells as all dead or all alive isn't very exciting. First let's add a function to `Cell` that we can call to set the value of `isAlive` directly. Add a new function to `Cell` called 'setIsAlive`, that takes a paramenter `value`. If `value` is true, assign `isAlive` to true, otherwise set it to `false`.

Now we want to add a new function `randomize` to `Grid`. It should loop over all of it's cells just like the `draw` function. But instead of calling `draw` on the cell, we want to call 'setIsAlive` and pass it a value that will evaluate to `true` or `false`.

We can use `random` to help us. Since `0` is treated as `false` and `1` is treated as `true`, we can do `floor(random(2))` and pass the result to 'setIsAlive`. `random(2)` will create random decimals between 0 and 2, and `floor` turns it into an integer by dropping everything after the decimal. You can try `print(random(2));` and `print(floor(random(2)));` to see the results in the console.

Finally, add `grid.randomize();` to the bottom of the 'setup` function.

#### Check
Each time you run the program, you should now be seeing a mix of dead and alive cells.

![screenshot](TODO)

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 5, randomize starting cells"

### Step 6
We are ready to start adding the logic for how the population will change over time, based on the following rules:

- Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if caused by underpopulation.
- Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next generation.
- Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by overpopulation.
- Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by reproduction.

Notice that each line expresses some conditional logic based on two properties: whether the cell is currently dead or alive, and how many of the neighboring cells are alive. We already have the ability to check if a cell is dead or alive, but now we need to add some code that will help us to count a cell's living neighbors.

First, add a new property to `Cell` to store `liveNeighborCount` and initialize it as `0` on creation.

Now let's add a new function called `updateNeighborCounts` to the `Grid` class and call it before `grid.draw`. We want this function to loop over all of the cells, count how many of it's neighbors are alive and then update `liveNeighborCount` for each one. Here's an outline of what the function needs to do:

```javascript
updateNeighborCounts () {
  // for each cell in the grid
  // reset it's neighbor count to 0
  // for each of the cell's neighbors, if it is alive add 1 to neighborCount
}
```

Notice there are two "for each" comments here. That's a clue that this method will include at least 2 nested for loops - once to look at each cell, and another to look at each neighhor of the cell. One of the hardest part of this function will be answering the question: how do we get the cell's neighbors?

Let's look at an example with a much smaller grid. If a cell is at position x, y in the grid, it's neighbor cells will be the 8 surround cells in the grid.

[insert image of 3x3 cell with neighbors]

You can see that the x-values for neighbor cells are either 1 less, the same, or 1 more than the current cell's x position. The same is true for the y-values.

So, given `currentCell`, the way to loop through all 9 x, y positions around and including the cell, the code would look like this:

```javascript
for (var xOffset = -1; xOffset <= 1; xOffset++) {
  for (var yOffset = -1; yOffset <= 1; yOffset++) {
    var neighborX = currentCell.column + xOffset
    var neighborY = currentCell.row + yOffset

    // do something with neighborX and neighborY
  }
}
```

You can use the above code to help get you started, but you'll still have to add in more code to handle a few different edge cases:

- this code will loop over 9 cells, including the current one, so be sure not to count the current cell as one of it's neighbors
- to avoid errors, your code shouldn't try to access grid locations that don't exist

[picture of cell on edge of the grid]

#### Check
add `print(currentCell.liveNeighborCount)` at the end of looping through it's neighbors and check in the console that the numbers look right. they should all be between 0 and 8.

[screenshot of different values in console]

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 6, update neighbor counts"

### Step 7
We're finally ready to apply the logic to each cell to determine whether it should be dead or alive in the next generation.

We want the `Grid` class to loop over each cell again (you should be very comfortable with these nested loops by now) and tell the cell to determine if it will be dead or alive. But we want the `Cell` class to be responsible for knowing the exact logic and handling it's own life or death.

Add an `updatePopulation` function to `Grid` and call it after `updateNeighborCounts` and before `draw`. Inside the method, loop over each cell and call `liveOrDie` on it.

Now make `liveOrDie` as a function in the `Cell` class. Here is where you now need to add some conditional logic for the cell to look at it's values for `isAlive` and `neighborCount` and determine what to change `isAlive` to.

- Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if caused by underpopulation.
- Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next generation.
- Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by overpopulation.
- Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by reproduction.

#### Check
Your game should be fully functional now! Try decreasing the cell size when you create the grid to see a larger population of cells on the screen at once to confirm that the population changes as expected.

[gif of working game]

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Use good commit messages, like "Finish step 7, population updates"

### Step 8+
Try extending the functionality of the game.

Here are some ideas:

Allow the user to...

- pause the game
- manually turn cells on or off
- re-randomize the population without refreshing the page
- adjust how fast the population changes (slower so you can see the changes more easily)
- see the current number of living cells
- see how many generations have occurred
- *or create your own modification!*

**IMPORTANT** Save your changes to GitHub! Continue to use good commit messages!
